And they had, of course, their own curriculum and
something else again.
So I got all kinds of education, but it never fit
into my . So I'd say, actually, probably grade one
below the top, which is the . I'd say . But you
thought he could have helped more. And
he's not political. He's not... No, I don't think
he would have time to go to any meetings that I know
of, because it was odd hours. Or had to join some
sort of... He might have. He might have had to join
it. But like you say, you know, you pay the first
month's dues and you pay the next, you know, that
kind of thing. Oh, yeah, yeah, no, I'm not making
any of that up. But there wasn't a... picture of
Hindenburg on the wall, or there was a picture of
Hitler on the wall, or there was a picture of
something. I'm just trying to gauge your level
of... There might have been a picture of
Hindenburg on the wall. Most families did. My
parents had a picture of Franz Joseph on the wall.
And that influenced the way I feel about things.
Okay, I see the capture, I see the routine shift
across North Africa, the big camps, the bigger and
bigger holding camps, and your experience with
the black GIs, and the difference in treatment
between how the British handled you and how the
U.S. troops handled you. I don't get any feeling
for searches, endless searches or endless...
Yes. Yeah, I just didn't... To me, that's their
right. It's a drag. We had them. But I wasn't upset
by it too much. We couldn't figure out what the
hell. They don't throw you somewhere else for
that. They were the constant searches. And
especially toward the end, they searched the camp
all the time. And we had to stay between those two
fences. And the orders were not to touch the
fences. So we had 500 people in this area. And they
guard staring at you and daring you to touch the
fence and that kind of thing. But my way of handling
these kind of situations is, you know, I'm in this,
I don't make any, I just, to me, that's the time to
keep your mouth shut and just do that. Sure. So I
don't get into any hassles. It's not my style. So
you went to larger camps and then you were
eventually put on ships and sent to the US, and then
put on trains, and then you started to feed into the
camp system. Which I knew nothing about, because I
had no idea that there were that many in three or
four camps. Yeah. And you didn't sidle up to make a
close chum that you went through these
experiences with?
No. I always had friends.
But I never, this real closeness that I couldn't
live without him, I really never got. That kind of
chumminess. But lots of friends. I can go almost
anywhere and immediately have somebody I like in
response to me. And we have a gay old time while
we're there, whatever we're doing. But you
weren't paired up with somebody or two or three
guys you used to meet every now and again in a
different camp somewhere and say, oh, I haven't
seen you in a long time. How was life in treating
you? Cold running into him. It may have happened
that way. But there again, it wasn't that close. It
was just nice to see a familiar face and say hi or
hi-o. Or hi-o, right. And it may have happened that
way. You can say there was a lot of good
comradeship. that i enjoyed so i was not isolated
by my own peers and i had a lot of friends and we had a
long barrack you know maybe 40 50 guys in there and
you gravitated to your little group make it hey can
i get close there right because they like to talk to
them better rather than the old grouch down there
right upper bunk or lower bunk I
believe in the first camp, we only had one . . . . . . .
There was no one directly from Schweitzer's head.
My unit, in fact, I think, was mentioned.
I got thrown into the Schwab's and the Saxon's. I
came from Prussia .
So I was always in a different environment. There
was no one from my hometown. That might have made a
difference, but I didn't. I was lucky to be
accepted because the Prussians, even in Germany,
are not that popular because they're a little more
uptight. more severe climate than the West
Germans. And the Southern Germans are much more
gregarious. The Schwaben, they have their
dialect. And the Saxons have their dialect like
the Southern guys here. Or in the old days, Arkes
and Oakies. Yes. And so to be accepted in these more
gregarious was due to my own gregariousness, I
think, and not be an outcast. I was not made an
outcast. No, no, I never imagined that you would
have been an outcast. I think that, if anything,
you're isolating yourself. I don't think that
they were isolating you. Did you find yourself a
minority, being Catholic, in a Protestant area?
It seemed like it was always 50. It was always
Catholicism. It was always pretty much 46. But you
didn't feel any animosity because of being
Catholic? No religious strife that I can think of.
Did you expect, even after you were captured, that
Germany was likely to win the war? Did you think it
was going to be, well, you know, when you were first
captured, was there a sense that I have to wait it
out until... Well, I thought they had something,
they had a plan of, you know, after all, they're
going to be, call themselves field marshals and
give themselves titles, and I thought they knew
what they were doing, but... They had some kind of
an overall plan. Did you have any sense of time of
how long you were likely to be in the camps, or did
you just level out mentally and not think about the
future? Yeah, I probably had, having had quite a
bit of history in school, I didn't worry about the
length of these things because we had as long in
history as long wars before. And, you know, we had a
four-year war, and WWI, and a three-year war, and a
seven-year war that was a hundred-year war. So I
was quite concerned. And by that time, I really,
that was one of the reasons probably that
contributed to my escape. I really had given up on
any time, right, on any, in my lifetime. You know,
because a hundred years, you got, you know, So I
just thought, I'll just do whatever I have to do. I
have to manufacture cigarette cases. And
schnitzel, that's called schnitzel. I saw it in a
book the other day. It was quite an art in those
days. Not that I had taken it in school or anything,
but all the churches had these wood carvings that
were just literally every wall, everything full
of wood carvings that I had seen, not necessarily
done. So when I had the time and somebody, I could
get a piece of wood and a knife, I would do
something, because I'd seen so much around me. I
was surrounded by this kind of artwork. Could you
easily get knives, or was there a concern that
these would be used as weapons? They were very easy
to find. They were short knives. And in the
beginning, for most of the time, we had almost an
understanding between the guards And the
prisoners, there was nothing we could do. I mean,
come on, where are we going to go? That type of
thing. Miles from home. Yeah. And the realistic
approach, we're not going to try this blowing up of
railroad things. It wouldn't have made a damn bit
of difference. It might make a good story, and then
But not where we were. And where would you blow up?
The desert? And they couldn't care less. And you
got a few letters from these two girls. while you
were in the camp, were those about the only people
who wrote, or were there other people as well? Oh,
other people as well. I probably kept trying to
keep in touch. I was a fairly good writer in those
days, I mean, active, and tried to keep my friends,
I wanted to keep my friends in touch.
But I don't really, per se, recall them except
those two girls that I wrote to, Maria, and I think
if I wrote to any third ones. But I used to, I would
meet girls skiing, like I'd go skiing by myself,
and you'd meet these local girls, like in the
Riesentuberg, in the Czechoslovakian border.
I would meet some girls that live nearby, come
skiing, and stops right next to me. So you'd meet
all kinds of girls, and sometimes you'd ask them
for their name and address, and I'd write to you,
and things like that. So I had a lot of contacts. And
by that time, like I say, most of my male friends had
gone. I was one of the last ones to leave the, to
enter the services. They had already gone. And I
will say a little episode. I remember after they
had to, it's in there when the law, there was a law
passed, the expulsion of the Jewish people. I
didn't know there was a law passed for it. It's
right in here. The year after, or very shortly
thereafter, I went back to the recently working.
It's in here. There was a law passed, you know, and I
went back. I said, I was skiing all along, I said,
what is the matter with these lodgers? It's just,
everything is so dead. Nobody to ski with, nobody
to talk to, just the people that run the lodge. And
everybody getting really grim, you know. Of
course, they had no business, you know. You can
imagine, your resort is falling, you know, no more
income for them. I didn't think in those business
terms, but I thought at the time that there were a
lot of Jewish people going skiing, and You know,
the fun, the laughing. Maybe because I associated
with the people leaving, you see. Where's all the
people? You know, we had much more fun. Is this the
way it's going to be? You know, kind of a drag. I
remember that kind of crossing my mind briefly.
You think it was because of the law of expelling the
Jews? Yeah, that's what I thought, you know.
Because where's everybody gone? You know, that
kind of stuff. So the
people you wrote to, you wrote to everybody at
home. You wrote to your folks. You could keep in
contact with. Yes. And the people who generally
wrote back to you were these two girls, your
parents, of course. Yes. Your brother Paul? No. Or
Lottie? Lottie might have made a footnote or
something. I don't think she wrote her separate
letters. We weren't on that boat. But always a
little note stuck with it. Did they tell you about
conditions at home, or it was just more chatty
news? No, just chatty news. They didn't say things
are going grim here? No. Uncle so-and-so is eating
the grapes and we've been reduced to nothing like
that. It's nothing that... I'm trying to find out
how high your morale is in the camp and how isolated
you are from events that are taking place.
I see. I would say pretty isolated. Maybe not me so
much, but the rest of them that couldn't read as
well. Since you got the American newspaper. Yeah,
because I got the American newspaper. I got to read
all the color stories. So you're building up an
impression of how bad things are at home. You're
not getting it so much from letters from your
family. But you're reading the newspaper, among
the few people who are, and you're building up a
pretty grim feeling about what home is going to be
like when you get back. So when the final thing
comes, that this is now falling into the Soviet
zone, which it did, you weren't wrong. You don't
see much of an attraction there. The letters are
not that encouraging from your folks or from the
lobby. There isn't that much family connection.
that you really... The last I remember was the
Spears fighting. I kept looking for the old man's
name. And the closest was the coal mines in Upper
Silesia, which was very close. And the fierce
fighting that took place. And the civilians that
were fighting, they were fighting for their
families. There were really horror stories of
them fighting. And then between civilians and
soldiers,
which was unknown to me. And the casualties, as
we're always reporting.
Could I interject something here?
Could
you talk a little longer? I was looking
for my town on maps and I could never find it. So one
of the first things that I did was to go to the
library, and I got out every possible thing I could
get, books, maps, everything. In Waianae, Makah.
This town, one of the Polish ones with all the new
names. And he was frantic. He was searching and
searching this little library out in Waianae,
Waianae. And he found it in one of the maps. It has no
sweet nidsets. Sweet nidsets, yeah. You almost
embraced that now. Well, I thought that a lot of
these towns were leveled. So you had looked in
libraries previously over the years. Over the
years you had? Yeah. I kept looking for that all the
time, what ever happened. Part of it was my
anxiety, because I was always afraid to look. It
was that fear of what you might find. So I was not a
good looker. She can calmly look. I was too excited
to look. If you get too excited, you can't find
anything. Would you have looked while you were
working in Clinton's cafeteria, wandering into a
library, or would you have... Not in those days.
Later on, I'd say, after I had a... Well, I would
read the papers all the time. I'm trying to think
when I look. And they would have maps in the paper,
and that town was never in it. Berkeley sounds like
a likely place, too. Would that be a place that you
would be using the university library? I was not
that courageous to use these facilities. I wished
I could have. I was afraid to ask directions. I was
too, you know, I wished I could have. I'd love to
have gone to Berkeley to school, but I just simply
was afraid because I never get close to
authorities of any kind, county, city, county,
state, federal. I stay away from all the
authoritative type. And even to this day, Gene
knows that. I just hate it. So I'm afraid that I have
to fill out forms and ask questions that I can't
answer. I wanted to back up to fill in one gap in the
escape itself. I realized when we were through
this that you never talked about food. I got the
sense of fear, the disappearance of the long run
and the ride on the train and getting off the train
and looking around, getting back on the train when
the women looked at you and pointed. Can you
remember how you ate, when you ate, when did you
realize you needed to eat? I asked you the same
thing. You know, I wished I could remember. I wish I
wished. The thing that I remember closely is that
there was a huge rock in my stomach. If you'd
offered me that meal that we had last night, I doubt
if I could have eaten it. And I probably was about 20
or 30 pounds underweight. I think you live on
starvation or something. I don't know how you
survive. But some, I'm sure, strangers offered me
food. And I'm sure I tried to get it, but I did not
steal any. I may have, let's see, in the desert
where I was, the first 500 miles, there was nothing
there to steal because there's no farms of any
kind. Eating a cactus. Eating a cactus. So it
couldn't have been that. And I think the first...
chance I had, I became a dishwasher. When I saw the
sign in the window, I simply became a dishwasher.
When you got to your first meeting. Maybe just
didn't eat, direct some water somewhere. Yeah,
direct maybe an orange or something, a fruit, or
whatever. But the first few days, just during the
first 24 hours, 48 hours. I doubt it, 48 hours. 72
hours. I don't think I could have held any food. Did
you meet any hobos at
that particular point? Probably when the train
stopped, there were men jumping out of it. We would
go down the train and there would be men jumping
out, but you always had to be careful because they
were immediately warned that there were going to
be railroad digs. I was immediately taught by
these older men, like the older monkeys teaching
the younger monkeys. Be careful, the railroad
guys are going to arrest you if you don't show
yourself to open the gate. Is that why when you said
that you'd see some of the hobos jumping off out in
the boonies, they would choose places? Yeah,
before they arrive at the yard, you must get off.
Not wait because they search the train when you
pull in. You have to get off outside of town and jump
on outside of town. But something
else that we talked about in California,
how our
paths were kind of parallel. We don't know if they
ever converged or not. And I remember in what had
been a long about probably March or April of 1948 in
California, As part of my territory,
I went to hobo camps along the Korea River. Which
river? To interview people in hobo camps. So I
don't know. I haven't seen firsthand what a hobo
camp looks like. I wonder. Yeah, there's a little
tin can with a coffee or the beans. It's always on
the fire. So if you stumbled upon a hobo camp,
First, they just follow these guys, and they go to
the next camp, and there'd be a pot of beans on a cup
of coffee or something. Enough to sustain you.
Enough to sustain you, they would give you. But you
did this life only for A year or two? Oh, less than
that. Probably just a few months until you get the
first dishwasher job. And then you get three
square meals a day almost, you see. And then you get
a few meals ahead. Yes. And save a few bucks in
whatever plan or ferments in your brain where you
want to go. And that would have happened. That
would have taken place. After the few months, then
one season with the Arkansas family up to Medford,
then the log cutting, the calf incident with the
splitter, down to the Mexican border, saw the
darkness on the other side, and realized that the
future was not there. Having a dishwasher job in a
waterfront cafe where all these workers come in,
the dock workers come in. Rowdy, raunchy, rowdy
place. Where was that? In San Pedro. That's where
you were looking for the ships? Yeah. That was
before you went north? Yeah, before I went north.
These things are kind of like a bird landing and
just checking it out. How did you usually leave
your jobs? Did you just not show up the next day? Not
show up. Make sure you got paid and that's it.
Right. And generally, that was? Cash. Cash. And
just something alerted you, or you just decided it
was time to move? Fear, constant. I don't think the
first three or four years, you really live in
constant fear. Then later on, it goes partial
fear. And then it gets a little less, but it never
completely disappears. Did you think of writing
to your folks Where to? Right.
Right. During that period, you said that you
really avoided reading the newspapers, that it
was, what you were reading was too frightening. I
could see two areas that would be very
frightening. One was when you said the maps would
be there and you weren't finding your village, and
the devastation that you'd be reading about of
your own country. Fierce fighting. And the other
would be the revelation of the atrocities that
were coming out of the concentration camps and so
on. Were those both stories that you, well, okay,
the first area you expressed has upset you. The
second area, did you believe the stories
of the atrocities? I would say there's definitely
aberrations that took place. Did you believe them
at the time or did you just shut it off? Not the
first, not right away. At first I didn't because I
left Germany that was entirely different
from the one that occurred afterwards that
changed in the actual war, the actual
devastation. There was hardly anything going on
in my time, so I didn't see anything that may have
taken place somewhere. But you knew the Jews had
been... Yeah, most of them, as far as I know, were
gone overseas, and whoever took them to foreign
countries were going all over the world. As far as I
was told, they were allowed to leave, and they
were, you know, so that was the point in time. We had
a few. I remember we had a butcher, and I think we had
a synagogue, and it was closed down. I would say
maybe 200 people out of a population of 20,000,
maybe something like that. I don't know. I'm just
guessing. It was a small minority.
So that's another horror story that I knew would
not end and would stay in Europe for the next 10,000
years.
But you didn't feel any responsibility for it. You
didn't have anything to do with it. There was no
reason why you had to. That wouldn't have
prevented you from saying to somebody that you
were German or you were German, I mean, it was
really that you were concerned about being
apprehended. Yeah, I probably did, because I
certainly didn't want to be associated with it.
Right, I see, I see. Just like if you... found out
you worked for a crooked company or something, you
could certainly disassociate yourself as
quickly as you can. So it made it a lot easier to
amputate. Yeah, it made it a lot easier. I'm sorry,
where did I start? I was just looking down at my list
because I didn't know if I had another question,
and that's what made these rules that I pulled from
going here.
Go ahead. Just a small one. When you talked about
having this area way back and you've been
quarantined, and you made a remark yesterday or
the day before about your friends, you couldn't
really keep in touch with them, but they could toss
flowers out the window. I pictured there a second
floor window. Were you up on the second story? No,
but I could climb up into my first apartment. There
was probably about seven feet off the ground.
Could you get up so that your face was over the
window so you and they could talk? Yeah, they could
see me. I could see, yeah. You and they would talk.
Sometimes it was without me, so there was
conversation. They could stand there and we would
talk, yeah. That is something that I found very
hard to relate to about one of his studies, was his
own bedroom. apparently was in the inner core of
the house, and he told me, this is quite
interesting, we had a period, we went to your
parents' room. Yeah, they gave me their room. The
room was this small, totally enclosed, no
windows, no light kind of room, and no. And he talks
about having claustrophobia. Claustrophobia,
yeah. It could have been. My brother had the big
room facing the street, Blue Brace Strasse, Do you
know how to spell that? Yes, I have it on my
postcard. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So he had the largest
room.
So you didn't share a room with your brothers and
sister? No. When I got old enough, they gave me
that. It was almost a pass-through, like a large
closet, had enough room for a bed. And it was
adjacent to my parents' bedroom and adjacent to
the living room. It would pass almost like a large
walk-in closet. Yeah, a large walk-in closet with
no windows. And Gina's always horrified. She has
to have a window. She has to have air open. The
window has to be open. And I said, I don't care.
Close that thing. This was second floor, third
floor? No, nine feet up. You could climb in it from
the rear. I climbed into it many times. So the
apartment was the first floor apartment? The
first floor apartment. And then we had a basement.
And my father made near beer down there, and
cabbage and pickles, and saw pickles, and stuff
like that. I miss what you're saying. I was
thinking, I could understand possibly why a child
would be
prone to pneumonia and numbness being in a . And
plus, an unbalanced diet and a horrible climate, a
pretty tough climate to live in. You've got to be
really, you know, A number one to survive there.
Did your friends come through often then, or was it
once a week? Did they every day on the way to school
holler something to you? No, it was once a week.
They kept in touch just to kind of cheer me up a
little bit. That was an all-boys school where you
were going. Yeah, all-boys, but the girls came.
Yeah, because we had, I'm trying to think of the
name of that girls' school, which was the exact
equivalent to what we had, and it was Ursula von
Miller that Hans was so crazy about, and Maria
Hoffman comes to mind, the other one, the doctor's
daughter, went to first eventually, got quit,
and... I may have been one or two others,
you know. So I had friends, good friends in school
that tried to cheer me up. I
got
it from my cousin in Berlin. She died of it. I went
into, I went to Berlin to cheer up her sister, and
that was a really cute guest. They looked Irish,
freckles, and I was reading books that she had got,
you know, picked up the virus from the books. Also
from that period, if you've already answered this
in a letter or when I was out of the room, you don't
need to answer, but I'm curious about your mom. If
you could describe your mom, who was she? What was
she like? She was a very pretty lady and she was very
proud of herself. with a short aristocratic nose.
She thinks I have it, but I don't. She hears much
straighter and smaller. And her laugh, she had a
marvelous laughter. She could get my father out of
any mood that he was in by tickling his ears or
blowing in his ears and laughing. It got him to
smile. She had the loudest sneeze of anyone. And I
still have a similar one. People always get
startled when I sneeze. I mean, she just blew out
the windows when she sneezed. And I do a similar
number even to this day. And
she was always nursing me for something, hot and
cold conferences for pneumonia or diphtheria.
And so she had a heck of a time with me. And I guess
it's
awful hard to raise somebody. And you can see it in a
picture that I'm the thinnest of the bunch. Very
thin and very underweight and always, you know,
skin and bones, they used to call me. You could
count the ribs, you know, and I have pictures even
in this country of my skinny chest.
So I was always concerned with my... I
did my own reading. She would always just supply me
with whatever I wanted. I had a little talk and chit
chat and cheer
me up. But I had my own books. I was more into reading
than they were. My parents get too busy to read.
They have to raise a family. And my father's hobby
was his pigeons, his Puffer pigeons, which he had
in the back. He built a cage over in the dump that we
had our garbage dump. And we spent many hours
there. Did your
father ever take you on the train? Oh, all the time.
Yeah. So you went to Breslau, maybe, and you went
to... We'd meet him at the depot, sometimes pick
him up, or I'd hang around the depot a lot to get a
picture of him. And read the magazines, have a
magazine stand there just like they have here.
Read foreign, maybe foreign newspapers even.
Because I remember reading a lot about England was
running the world at that time. So I remember
reading what they said. And at first, I remember
reading the word common sense, which is a very
popular expression in the English language, but
not in German. I don't think there's a word for it,
even. And I was always interested in finding out
what common sense was. The search for common
sense. The search for common sense. I wanted to
pursue that. So do we all.
Because we had proverbs and things like that. They
contained maybe some common sense, but they also
contained a lot of stuff that you didn't really
need. In fact, I just opened one up here. That's the
page. This is from Christine Von of Sweden. The
first line I can't translate. Maybe you can. I
forget what those words are. Faden, what's a
faden? A pen, yes. A pen, yes. You cannot write with
a borrowed pen? Yes, you can't write long with a
borrowed pen. Man kann nicht lange. You can't
write with a borrowed pen for long. You know, old
wives tales and homilies. You can't do it for long.
Yeah, and this one down here is kind of good.
Man soll seine Geheimnisse niemals unnötig
ausplaudern. One should not blurb out your
secrets unnecessarily. Exactly that. Right
there. And that's Christine of Sweden, the Queen
of Sweden. She was born on December 18th. These are
all people, everything relates to December 18th.
A horoscope, that's a good thing. During your
childhood, would you portray yourself as a very
well-behaved child, or mischievous, or a
combination? Who were you? I would say a
combination. I would get occasionally into
trouble. And how would they discipline you? Oh, I
did get a call to the principal's room one time, and
it was really a pretty horrifying experience to be
threatened with expulsion and things like that.
Yes, they really landed on me. It was pretty
frightening. But most of the time, I was in the
middle. I was associated with the troublemaker,
which was Hans Souvan. He was my best friend, but I
wasn't the actual troublemaker. So you might say I
was just near trouble all the time, but not
necessarily in it. Did your parents discipline
you harshly? Well, they, I think they laid down
some pretty straight rules and they just, I always
had the feeling they wanted just the best. They
wanted me to be, you know, better than they are and
get a better education, get a better job, don't
work so hard so you don't have to work so hard like my
father does and, you know, get a nice easy job like
we had a renter upstairs who worked for the city and
So your father owned the building? Yeah, he owned
the building. I see, I see. So he was the
supervisor. You had to solve the problems of the
people who lived in the building, fix their
plumbing, do things like that. Yeah, he was very
good at it. Because he had been a superintendent on
a construction before he, right after his war.
World War I, right? Yeah, he had to show me
pictures. He had been a construction
superintendent before. He was very good at fixing
anything in the building. Yeah,
that's right. If things got really rough, I would
crawl under the table. If you couldn't get me out.
You mean, like, got really rough? Well, if I was
scolded for not doing this, then the other,
whether my shoes were too dirty or I didn't do my
homework or whatever, if they were landing on me,
leaning on me too hard, asking me, I would
simply... We had a big, like that Spanish table. We
had a heavy wood table. And so I crawled and was
playing with that. Were you hidden so they didn't
know where you were? Or was it just that they knew
that you were hiding out? At first, I thought they
probably didn't know where I was because he was
there. Tablecloth. Tablecloth hanging over it so
I had my own little private hideout. I found that a
very interesting story because that's what they
do when he says, when people hassle me too much or
things get too rough, and the tablecloth.
Tablecloth under the table and you got your. And
you cannot get him out. And that's what he is. It's
like when I was to the point of really pressing,
pressing. And then I wouldn't listen to them
either. In other words, they could tell me to come
out, but I wouldn't. So there was a standoff. Yes,
yes. Mexican standoff. Just let it blow over.
Describe your dad. Well, the shocker, I had a
shocker a few years back when I opened the page in a
newspaper and I see this picture and I says, that's
my dad. You know, looked just like him, square
face, little sparse hair, but squarish face. And I
read on, and it was,
his name is General Brown, Chief of Staff. Oh, yes.
That's what he looks like. At least that's what I
thought he looked like. Yeah, I remember General
Brown. That was a few years back. I recall, Chief of
Staff. That was when he said something about
the... Maybe Brown looked a little bit better, but
that could be his brother. You know, you want to
resemble... And I was always looking for these
similarities. I don't know why that makes you feel
better to see. Instead of being in a strange land,
I'm converting a strange land into a... a land that
is full of things that I know. Yes, yes, that's
reasonable. So I always, whether this is right or
not, I just made this up. Was your dad a harsh man or a
gentle man, authoritarian or
democratic? I would say he was... Not... You could
talk to him. But, you know, he was a macho man and a
very busy man with his job, working his odd hours,
had his own hobbies, lived his own life,
therefore. And they had a marvelous relationship
with his wife, as you can see with their fights and
their open affection that was openly displayed.
But the usual estrangement of, you know, this
modern young man going to this fancy school,
learning foreign languages that they know
nothing about. I'm sure there was a certain
estrangement. We had our generation gap. I don't
think that was definitely there. I'm sure
everybody has those. And you have to come to terms
with that kind of thing. But you never thought of
going into the railroad business, or you never
thought of raising pigeons yourself, or of... No,
I had to have my own world already. And I was maybe a
little disappointed he never came down to watch me
play tennis. That was maybe a little strange.
That, I think, probably was... I have to give him a
minus for that. But other than that, like I said, he
had his own things. Yeah. Why do you think he didn't
come down to see you? I don't know. He was always
proud. He said he saw the name in the paper. He saw
the score.
But nothing like that. You know, the doting
parents like now, Christ, you know, kind of a world
champion or something like that. None of this, no.
However, just an aside on the tennis, the one that
did come to watch me, unbeknownst to me, this girl
that blonde in Waldenburg that I was so crazy about
whose mother did not care for me, because the
championships were held in Waldenburg, her
hometown. And later on, when I met her again after,
because I got a weight into the army.